Clarify that arbitrary unicode is allowed in user/room IDs and room aliases (#1506)
matrix-org/matrix-spec: content/appendices.md

    extended_user_id_char = %x21-39 / %x3B-7E  ; all ASCII printing chars except :

##### User IDs over federation

Due to a lack of validation in original Matrix homeserver implementations,
the localpart of user IDs over federation may contain any valid unicode
codepoints except `:`. A future spec change may create a new room version

> to disallow such user IDs.

Author: > aaaaaaaargh everything is awful

:+1: 

> I can't see any difference between this and "Historical user IDs". They are both "IDs you're not supposed to create but might have to deal with because apparently validation is hard"

The only difference is that there are real users who have created historical user IDs on normal clients and servers. Arbitrary unicode ids exist in the wild too, but it has never been possible to create them without modifying the server.

> do they even have to be valid unicode codepoints?

I think server implementations try to decode utf-8 sufficiently early so that invalid unicode user IDs explode before being persisted anywhere, but I'm not completely sure.

> to disallow such user IDs.

Reviewer: > I think server implementations try to decode utf-8 sufficiently early so that invalid unicode user IDs explode before being persisted anywhere, but I'm not completely sure.

ok, that seems fair. Let's assume they *do* have to be UTF-8 until someone proves otherwise :)

users whose user IDs do not conform to the permitted character set, and
a number of rooms whose history includes events with a `sender` which
does not conform. In order to handle these rooms successfully, clients

> and servers MUST accept user IDs with localparts consisting of any legal
> unicode codepoint except for `:` and `NUL` (U+0000), including other control
> characters and the empty string. Localparts MUST be valid UTF-8 sequences.

Reviewer: we're talking characters rather than bytes here, so "MUST be valid UTF-8 sequences" seems confusing. I think we want:

```suggestion
and servers MUST accept user IDs with localparts consisting of any legal
non-surrogate Unicode code points except for `:` and `NUL` (U+0000), including other control
characters and the empty string.
```

Reviewer: I did a bit of testing on Synapse. As far as I can tell, it rejects any attempt to use the surrogates. If you encode the surrogates as UTF-8 (`<ed> <a0> <80>`, say, which is the UTF-8 encoding of U+D800), and send that over HTTP, Synapse will reject the request when it tries to decode the UTF-8. 

Likewise, it refuses to persist any strings containing the surrogates to the database, or to put them in outgoing HTTP requests/responses, because it fails to encode them as UTF-8.

I'm therefore pretty happy to say that nobody has to deal with the surrogates.

users whose user IDs do not conform to the permitted character set, and
a number of rooms whose history includes events with a `sender` which
does not conform. In order to handle these rooms successfully, clients
and servers MUST accept user IDs with localparts consisting of any legal

> unicode codepoint except for `:`, including zero characters. Localparts

Reviewer: I spent a while wondering what a zero character was.

```suggestion
unicode codepoint except for `:`, including the empty string. Localparts
```

> MUST be valid UTF-8 sequences.

Reviewer: to be clear: we allow control chars (U+0000, etc) here?

Author: NUL is probably a special case, but other control characters are definitely allowed (I've created `@\x07:maunium.net`, `@\x08:maunium.net` and `@\x0B:maunium.net` at least)

> Servers SHOULD NOT produce user IDs with localparts outside of the following

Reviewer: surely servers SHOULD NOT produce user IDs with localparts outside of `a-z`, `0-9`,
`.`, `_`, `=`, `-`, `/`, and `+` ?

Author: This part probably just needs some rewording, but it depends on how the above thread about the three user ID classes is resolved.

character set, and SHOULD NOT forward such user IDs to clients when referenced
outside the context of an event. For example, device list updates from "invalid"

> user IDs would be dropped by the receiving server.

Reviewer 2: This is worse than just removing events by these users, as things will only half work (E2EE will entirely break for them in weird and wonderful ways).

Reviewer: If you set your localpart to a smiley poo, E2EE will break for you. That's fine by me. What I care about is you not being able to DoS a room by setting your localpart to a smiley poo, which is why we have to accept events over federation whose senders are invalid; we don't have to do much else to help such users.

> Servers SHOULD NOT produce user IDs with localparts outside of the following
> character set, and SHOULD NOT forward such user IDs to clients when referenced
> outside the context of an event. For example, device list updates from "invalid"
> user IDs would be dropped by the receiving server.

Reviewer: How about this:

```suggestion
User IDs with localparts containing characters outside the range U+0021 to U+007E, or with
an empty localpart, are considered non-compliant. For current room versions, servers must
still accept events using such user IDs over federation; however they SHOULD NOT forward
such user IDs to clients when referenced outside the context of an event. For example,
device list updates from non-compliant user IDs would be dropped by the receiving server.
```

    extended_user_id_char = %x21-39 / %x3B-7E  ; all ASCII printing chars except :

A future room version may prevent users using a historical character set

> from participating. Use of the historical character set is *deprecated*.

Reviewer: I'm still not entirely following this.

As far as I can tell, we are suggesting that there are three different classes:

1. "Conformant" user IDs, consisting only of `a-z`, `0-9`, `.`, `_`, `=`, `-`, `/`, and `+`, which we'd like servers to generate.
2. "Historical" user IDs set 1, consisting of any printing ASCII except `:`, which we have to treat the same as "Conformant" user IDs.
3. "Historical" user IDs set 2, consisting of any unicode codepoints except `:`, which we filter out. Sometimes.

I'm still not entirely following the logic that says we need three different classes: do we really?

If we're going to go with it, can we try to make it clearer that we have them? Maybe give each of them their own name rather than smashing two of them together as "historical". It reads rather confusingly at the moment.

Author: If things like dropping device list updates from users in set 2 is done, then it must be distinct from set 1, because set 1 contains real users. Some appservices still create uppercase users too (e.g. matrix-appservice-irc: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-appservice-irc/issues/1399).

Other than that I guess they don't really need to be separate.

Author: @turt2live this is the main outstanding thing that I'm not sure about

Reviewer: Right, I get this now. The proposal is to define 3 different classes of user IDs:

1. "Conformant" user IDs, consisting only of `a-z`, `0-9`, `.`, `_`, `=`, `-`, `/`, and `+`. Servers SHOULD generate user-ids using only this set.
2. "Historical" user IDs, which contain characters outside the above set, but still in the range `%x21-39 / %x3B-7E` (ie, printing ASCII). There are real users in this set, so we have to treat them the same as "Conformant" user IDs, but servers SHOULD NOT generate such user IDs.
3. "Non-conformant" user IDs, which contain characters outside the printing ASCII range. Servers must accept these in event fields such as `sender` to avoid breaking the fabric of the room, but can otherwise ignore them, for example not sending device-list updates for such users.

homeserver which created the alias. Other servers may contact this
homeserver to look up the alias.

The localpart of a room alias may contain any valid unicode codepoints
except `:`.

Room aliases MUST NOT exceed 255 bytes as UTF-8 (including the `#` sigil

> and the domain).

Reviewer 3: I think we should assume yes until proven otherwise, when we can update the spec again.

human-readable. They are intended to be treated as fully opaque strings
by clients.

The localpart of a room ID (`opaque_id` above) may contain any valid

> unicode codepoints, including control characters, except `:` and `NUL`

Reviewer: Again I think we can and should exclude the surrogates here

```suggestion
non-surrogate Unicode code points, including control characters, except `:` and `NUL`
```

human-readable. They are intended to be treated as fully opaque strings
by clients.

The localpart of a room ID (`opaque_id` above) may contain any valid

> unicode codepoints except `:`, but it is recommended to only include

Reviewer: again, we allow ctrl chars?

Author: Yeah, probably best to define everything except NUL as allowed like with user IDs

> unicode codepoints except `:`, but it is recommended to only include
> ASCII letters and digits when generating them.

Reviewer: Let's be clearer about what's allowed: 

```suggestion
unicode codepoints except `:`, but it is recommended to only include
ASCII letters and digits (`A-Z`, `a-z`, `0-9`) when generating them.
```

homeserver which created the alias. Other servers may contact this
homeserver to look up the alias.

The localpart of a room alias may contain any valid unicode codepoints

> except `:`.

Reviewer: ... do we allow NUL in aliases?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The localpart of a room alias may contain any valid unicode codepoints
except `:` and `NUL`.
```
